This file documents what a Coq developer needs to know about the
Dune-based build system. If you want to enhance the build system
itself (or are curious about its implementation details), see
build-system.dev.txt, and in particular its initial HISTORY section.

About Dune
==========

Coq can now be built using [Dune](https://github.com/ocaml/dune).

## Quick Start

You need Dune >= 1.2.1 ; just type `dune build` to build the base Coq
libraries. No call to `./configure` is needed.

Dune will get confused if it finds leftovers of in-tree compilation,
so please be sure your tree is clean from objects files generated by
the make-based system.

If you want to build the standard libraries and plugins you should
call `make -f Makefile.dune voboot`. It is usually enough to do that
once per-session.

More helper targets are availabe in `Makefile.dune`, `make -f
Makefile.dune` will display some help.

Dune places build artifacts in a separate directory `_build`; it will
also generate an `.install` file so files can be properly installed by
package managers.

Contrary to other systems, Dune doesn't use a global `Makefile` but
local build files named `dune` that are later composed to form a
global build.

As a developer, Dune should take care of all OCaml-related build tasks
including library management, merlin files, and linking order. You are
are not supposed to modify the `dune` files unless you are adding a
new binary, library, or plugin.

## Per-User Custom Settings

Dune will read the file `~/.config/dune/config`; see `man
dune-config`. Among others, you can set in this file the custom number
of build threads `(jobs N)` and display options `(display _mode_)`.

## Targets

The default dune target is `dune build` (or `dune build @install`),
which will scan all sources in the Coq tree and then build the whole
project, creating an "install" overlay in `_build/install/default`.

You can build some other target by doing `dune build $TARGET`.

In order to build a single package, you can do `dune build
$PACKAGE.install`.

Dune also provides targets for documentation, testing, and release
builds, please see below.

## Developer shell

You can create a developer shell with `dune utop $library`, where
`$library` can be any directory in the current workspace. For example,
`dune utop engine` or `dune utop plugins/ltac` will launch `utop` with
the right libraries already loaded.

Note that you must invoke the `#rectypes;;` toplevel flag in order to
use Coq libraries. The provided `.ocamlinit` file does this
automatically.

## Compositionality, developer and release modes.

By default [in "developer mode"], Dune will compose all the packages
present in the tree and perform a global build. That means that for
example you could drop the `ltac2` folder under `plugins` and get a
build using `ltac2`, that will use the current Coq version.

This is very useful to develop plugins and Coq libraries as your
plugin will correctly track dependencies and rebuild incrementally as
needed.

However, it is not always desirable to go this way. For example, the
current Coq source tree contains two packages [Coq and CoqIDE], and in
the OPAM CoqIDE package we don't want to build CoqIDE against the
local copy of Coq. For this purpose, Dune supports the `-p` option, so
`dune build -p coqide` will build CoqIDE against the system-installed
version of Coq libs, and use a "release" profile that for example
enables stronger compiler optimizations.

## Stanzas

`dune` files contain the so-called "stanzas", that may declare:

- libraries,
- executables,
- documentation, arbitrary blobs.

The concrete options for each stanza can be seen in the Dune manual,
but usually the default setup will work well with the current Coq
sources. Note that declaring a library or an executable won't make it
installed by default, for that, you need to provide a "public name".

## Workspaces and Profiles

Dune provides support for tree workspaces so the developer can set
global options --- such as flags --- on all packages, or build Coq
with different OPAM switches simultaneously [for example to test
compatibility]; for more information, please refer to the Dune manual.

## Documentation and test targets

The documentation and test suite targets for Coq are still not
implemented in Dune.

## Planned and Advanced features

Dune supports or will support extra functionality that may result very
useful to Coq, some examples are:

- Cross-compilation.
- Automatic Generation of OPAM files.
- Multi-directory libraries.
